Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Howard Waldrop is a science fiction writer whose stories began appearing in the early
1970s and he's written some remarkably good ones.
His reputation as one of science fiction's finest short story writers is growing.
Waldrop's The Ugly Chickens won a nebula award in 1981 and God's Hooks was a 1983 nebula
finalist.
I Cut the Mic is a 1983 Hugo finalist.
Waldrop wrote for fanzines as a teenager but finally he was inspired to write science
fiction.
Here he tells us what inspired him.
Well, actually, if you want to know, everybody has a story like this but I read Lynn Carter's
Wizards of Lemuria and I said if he can get that published, I can write, I can get that,
you know, I can get my stuff published.
It's real obvious.
I mean, everybody, I think, has a story about that.
They read something after they've been reading this for 20 years.
They finally read something that just pushes their buttons and says, that's garbage, you
know, I can write better than that even when you're 18 years old.
He said, I can write better than that.
And you set out to prove it.
And a lot of people set out to prove it, write a story and like submit it or don't submit
it, just write the story to prove it.
They can write a story, you know, not even writing a story.
So essentially is I got serious.
Walter was first professional sale was a story called Lunchbox.
We asked him how he initially got published.
Essentially, I had been trying to get published since 1966.
Been serious about it, 65 and 66.
And I'd been publishing in fanzines all along, stories in fanzines.
And I just kept sending the stories out until finally one of them sold.
I mean, there was no problem breaking in as such.
I mean, it wasn't like a conscious thing saying, this is the one I'm going to break
in with or I'm going to write a story to break in.
It was just I'd been sending them out and getting them back until one day I sent one
out and it didn't come back.
You know, check came back.
And that's, you know, it was like I'd been, I'd been writing for fanzines all along in
comic scripts and things like that.
And the story just came, I mean, when it was time for it to sell, it's old.
Lunchbox details the fate of the first Viking lander shortly after it touches down on Mars
since the story was written prior to the actual Viking landing, but was published after the
landing took place.
We ask Waldrop if any changes had to be made in the interim.
I sold that story in 1969 or not in 69 and 70.
And I sold it four days or I got the letter four days after I was drafted in the army.
And but because John Kimmel, it was so analog because John Kimmel died in the meantime and
everything was in and uproar at Street and Smith for about, or Condon asked for six months
or so.
Ben Bova wrote me a letter in 1972 and said, I'm changing all.
The original it was called Voyager.
If you remember the Viking, the Viking stuff was all called Voyager.
And the whole story was talking about the Voyager lander and all this kind of stuff.
And Ben Bova wrote and says, is it okay if I change, change Voyager to Viking so you
won't look like a jerk?
And I said, why sure, Ben?
Yeah, you know, anything you want.
And you know, because the technology changed the, the changed the term, you know, the terminology
in the meantime.
And, you know, I'd been in the army and what was that?
You know, I was guarding PX's and stuff, you know, and you know, I hadn't been kept up
on the change in terminology in the meantime, you know.
But yes, it was, it preceded, there were, there were several prototype models of the,
essentially what became the Viking lander all competing for, for the contract in the
late 60s.
And the Voyager thing was one of them.
And I've got a, I've got a picture I visited Langley for one of the mock-ups of the, of
the original Voyager thing, which was slightly, it looked much the same as the Viking eventually
was, but had, you know, longer arm and all this kind of stuff, you know.
But anyway, yeah, it, it preceded the program.
So that's why, you know, the change to Viking was, you know, like, fitted into the story.
More with Howard Walder up on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Science fiction writer Howard Walder collaborated with several writers on short stories in the
1970s, including Stephen Utley, Buddy Saunders, George Proctor, and George Martin.
We asked Walder why these collaborations took place.
There was a group of us, and we all, it's, it's, it's amazing that it happened.
We're all from, we're all from Texas, living in Texas, and we all published our first story
within like six or eight months of each other.
It was amazing.
It just happened that way.
And we all got, got, got to meet each other at conventions within like six months of our
first story is being published.
And we were all writing at the same time.
We were all serious about this stuff we were going to take over.
And one of the ways we did it was we started collaborating with each other.
And we'd do stories on our own, but then we'd also do stories that we couldn't do on our
own with the other people.
And it wasn't a conscious effort on anybody's part.
I think it just, one of those things that just happened, you know, we were just all
writing at the same time.
We were all right there.
Like Buddy was my landlord, you know, he owned one half a duplex.
And I was any other.
And he, of course, he got me into comics fandom 10 years before that anyway.
And some of us were friends.
Some of us met each other and became friends and things like that.
And it's just that we just, we just sparked each other, you know, if you, if you had something
you were doing and you got through with it and you weren't quite ready to do something
else, you could always, you know, do a collaboration with Buddy or with, or with Proctor or with,
you know, you know, anything like that.
And like we just, there must have been in space of about two years, there must have
been 35 or 40 stories come out of the various collaborations, you know, two and sometimes
three way collaborations with people, you know, it was amazing.
And it's amazing that it happened.
And it's amazing that we got so much done on our own too, besides doing all that.
One of these collaborations of voice and bitter weeping written with Buddy Saunders was expanded
to a novel, the Texas-Israeli War, 1999.
We asked Walter how this transformation occurred.
We originally wrote that story before I sold Lunchbox even.
Buddy and I did this 10,000 word novella or novel ad in alternate chapters.
Like, you know, as, as in the novel, as in the first like 50 pages novel, we tried to sell
that thing everywhere and it would not sell.
I did, you know, it got up to the point where the battleship, the battle with the
battleship or the cruiser in, in Dallas, that was where the thing ended.
And it wouldn't sell anywhere.
And I went in the army and Buddy quit trying to market it while I was in the army.
Well, when I came out of the army and I started selling stories and all this stuff and everybody
started selling stories, Buddy started writing again.
He also took voice and bitter weeping, took all my parts out of it, in other words, half
the story just by leaving the parts he'd written in and sold it first thing off to a galaxy.
And OK.
And then he sold it to Galaxy.
Judy Lindell Ray was the assistant editor at Galaxy and had just been hired by
Ballantyne Books as their SF editor.
The last thing she saw before she left Galaxy was our story and she liked it and she wrote
it and she said, I like this story a lot.
Do you think you could come up with a, with an outline for a novel?
And if you do, I'll offer you so much and so much.
And we went, oh, wow, you know.
So we said, not only do we have an outline, we sit down and like continue the outline
as the book goes like in one night.
So we said, not only do we have an outline, but the first 10,000 words are already written.
You know, just like that.
We just stuck my parts back in the alternate chapters back in.
We had 10,000 words of the book already.
All we had to do is write another 45,000 words, you know.
And they wrote back, you know, they accepted the outline and gave us contract.
And that was, you know, we wrote the book.
That was, it was a stroke of luck.
It was just a stroke of luck.
We were, it was at the right place at the right time, you know, two, two weeks before or two
weeks later, it wouldn't have, that wouldn't have happened probably.
More with Howd Wald up on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
In 1976, a collaboration between Howard Waldrup and Stephen Utley produced the nebula finalist
novelette, Custer's Last Jump.
Custer's Last Jump is an immensely detailed alternate world story, which begins with the
American Civil War.
In this alternate history, both the Union and the Confederacy have airplanes, which figure
heavily in the war.
During the conflict, the Ogala Sioux leader, Crazy Horse, manages to acquire and secrete
a few planes himself.
In 1876, these planes are used in a climactic battle against Custer.
Waldrup explains how the story was written.
Utley had always been a Custer freak.
He knew all about all that stuff.
I'd always been an airplane freak, so I knew all about the airplane stuff.
And we started one night in 1972.
It was like November of 1972.
We started playing, can you top this on a typewriter?
You know?
And so Utley wrote this section about part of the second part, the Collier's article.
We're about two pages that, and he read it to me over the phone.
And about an hour later, I rang him back up and read the first five, you know, first
three pages of the part of the Smithsonian report about Crazy Horse's airplane.
And we just went crazy from there, you know?
And like the story was written in like six days or something like that.
I did a tremendous amount of research in the time between the time we started the
story and the time we finished it, you know?
One of the things was it was written in the alternate.
I wrote the airplane part.
Utley wrote the Collier's article.
Steve wrote the twain part because he'd always been fascinated by Mark Twain.
And then I wrote the Testament of Black Man's Hand, you know, that twain transcribes
in the story.
And then we both sat down and wrote the bibliography together.
You know, did all this stuff in the bibliography.
And it came out, I think it took about a week to write the story, but it was because
we both of us knew certain parts, you know, already had done research in certain areas
that we could write the story and use the other research we did as we wrote it to finish it.
But we did research, but we already had a lot of research, too.
All of Waldrop's stories are characterized by a lot of details.
This prompted us to ask Waldrop how much research he does prior to his writing a story.
It's like everybody says, and I know it's true, I researched too much.
I researched everything too much.
Every story I write, I research a whole bunch and then don't use half of it, you know?
Don't use a third of it, usually something like that.
I like certain research that I want to do, but I don't want to do it.
On my own when I'm not sure what I'm doing.
So I read a whole lot about the whole subject.
And a lot of that works its way back into the story.
When I know exactly what I want to do in a story, then I get real specific and that research is not as much fun.
You know, because you're saying I need to know exactly when or exactly what or something like that.
You know, and that's nice because then you got to look.
Whereas if you don't know anything, not anything, but you don't know much about the field, you can just go
and get everything on it and just start going through it and reading it and coming across fan, you know,
fascinating little nuggets and stuff like that to use, you know?
But I do too much research.
I do way too much research for every story.
And it's like sometimes the research will take a month and the story will take two days.
You know, it's...
We asked Walter if he considers this extra research to be wasted effort.
Well, it's never wasted.
It's only wasteful in the sense that I could possibly be doing the next thing down the line
while I'm still doing the research on one thing.
You know, I could already be through with the story and have it.
But I do the research and it just shows up in the story, you know, in the story.
We'll have more with Howard Walter upon our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
The 1981 Nebula Award for Best Novelette went to Howard Waldrop's The Ugly Chickens.
Waldrop has had several works which made the final ballot in the Nebula voting,
but The Ugly Chickens is his first winner.
I have not mixed feelings, but I had no idea when I wrote Ugly Chickens how good it was or not.
I hadn't written a story for about six months when I wrote that.
I was doing other stuff and I was working on research on other things,
and I hadn't written an actual story.
So when I finally wrote Ugly Chickens, I didn't know if it was any good or not.
I really didn't. I couldn't tell anymore. It worked on it so long, you know.
I did all this research for the thing, like I did six months of research for it.
It's way too long for a story.
And then I wrote the story and I didn't know if the story was any good or not.
And then I sent it off to Terry and like the thing was that Terry at the time was taking a lot of medicine.
He had a really he'd wrenched his back and he was taking a lot of medicine and reading for
universe at the same time. Universe filled up and he said I'd like to take it,
but universe is filled up and all this stuff.
And I said okay and about that time, Marta Randall called.
You know, I just heard from Terry about the story and I want it real bad and
will you take twice as much money for it?
You know, and I said oh sure, right? You know, so she ran down the hill and got the story from
Terry and brought, you know, and sent me a contract and like two nights later, I walk in the house
and it's 12, 30 at night and the phone rings and says Howard, this is Terry.
I could just see dollars flying out the window.
I knew exactly what was going to happen, you know, and like he had gotten off his medicine
and one of the stories he had been promised wasn't delivered and the person said I can't do it,
you know, and he wanted the story back real bad and like he was trying, you know, he was trying
politely to get the story back for less money than Marta was going to pay me and all this kind of.
Anyway, I had no idea whether at the time, whether the story was any good or it was just Marta and
I always try to hope that the next story, a writer one down the line is going to be,
going to be my best, you know, and there's just no, you know, I like ugly chickens.
It still holds up, I think, real well, if that's what you mean. I went back and re-read it about
three months ago and it was still a good story, which is all you can hope for because some of
them aren't, you know, or not, not they're not good, it's that they're not, not like you remember
them or wanted them to be. The final 1983 Nebula Ballot featured a Waldrop story,
God's Hooks. It's based on the meeting between two monumental literary figures, Isaac Walton and
John Bunyan. And it's amazing that nobody had stuck those together and because they did,
any, any time you look at a survey of English literature, the two books that are unclassifiable,
the only two unclassifiable books in other words are like biographies and there were like
histories and there were beginnings of novels and there were poetry and plays and all that,
but the only two unclassifiable books they talk about are, are, is Pilgrim's Progress and The
Complete Angler. You know, those are two totally, totally, you know, classical books and they're
not like any other books written that century or before since, you know. It amazed me that nobody,
nobody had put the two together and the obvious way to put the two together was, you know,
I'm gonna sit there one day and I said, I was doing research on Walton and Bunyan all
of a sudden, Walton Fish is in the slew of the spine. You know, it's obvious, you know, right?
You know, it's just, it's just totally obvious, you know, and it amazed me that nobody had done
it before, especially a British writer, you know, especially a British writer. There were lots of
people who were capable of doing that, you know, and nobody had done it and it, and it was amazing.
More with Howard Walder upon our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Hard Waldrop's story, Mary Margaret Roadgrater,
was a nebula finalist short story in 1976. Centered in the desert southwest, Mary Margaret
Roadgrater portrays a rather bleak future. Their protagonists are American Indians and they
occasionally have get-togethers, which are highlighted by contests involving vehicles,
something akin to tractor pulls.
I'd always been fascinated with Indians and the Mary Margaret Roadgrater was another one of those
stories like, no, no, no, worry, they're about three I've done. They just came to me in a flash.
I mean, it was just, I've done research on Indians for years. I'd taken a course in college in American
Indian literature and things like that. But the story itself just came in a flash one morning,
early one morning, you know. And I wrote it like in a day, you know, the whole thing, beginning to
end, you know, and I knew exactly like it came to me, the entire story. It's really amazing. It's
really a rare thing and like writers usually have about in their whole career that happens about
twice or three times, you know, and I've used up two of mine. I know, I know, you know, it's really
nice when it happens. But just all the research I've done through the years just tumbled out,
you know, while I was writing the story. Here he explains what made the story come to him.
It was essentially, I guess, a lot of, you know, a lot of stuff had just been running around in my
mind for months and months. And what triggered it was I got up early one morning, I was visiting a
friend in Austin and sleeping on the couch and I got up and I put on Bridge Over Trouble Water by
Simon and Garfunkel. In between the opening notes and like the end of the first verse, the whole
story just went, you know, and I said, wow, you know, this is great. And I guess it was, I mean,
if you go back and you, if you listen to Bridge Over Trouble Water and you read the story, there's
no common element at all. It's just something in the, I guess, in the field or the mood of the song
at the time that just brought all that out. 1983's Hugo Finals include a Waldrop story,
Ike at the Mic, which appeared in Omni. This story has an interesting background.
Mainly we're watching the Heroes of Rock and Roll, volume two or whatever it was. And they did a,
like a 30 second bit at the end showing the two heroes of the 50s, which were Elvis Presley and
Dwight David Eisenhower. And it just showed clips from both their lives, you know, right?
And I said, wow, you know, a world where Ike is, Ike is the musician and Elvis is the politician,
you know. And I tried to give the story to Chad Oliver and Lewis Shiner. They wanted to collaborate
at the time. And I tried to give the story to them. I said, okay, because Chad's a jazz, jazz music,
you know, fan has been from way back and Lou knows everything or is know about Presley. He wrote a
book on Presley at one time. And I tried to just give them the idea. I said, look, Ike is a jazz
musician. Presley is a politician. Come on, you know, do the story, send it off, make a lot of money.
You know, right? And he said, we just can't get past the idea of Ike as a musician. You know,
they just couldn't do it. They just couldn't force themselves. You know, I mean, Chad is too close to
jazz, to desecrate it like that. And I guess Lou is too close to Presley to, you know,
see the possibilities and, you know, in politics for Presley. But once they wouldn't take it,
I said, well, hell, I'm going to have to write it myself, you know. So I sat down and wrote it,
you know, it's like you, it's just one of those ideas that bothers you to write it, you know. I mean,
and once, once I knew I had to write it, then I sat down and I did just enough research on Ike and
just enough on Presley to know about how they would be probably about it and wrote the story.
Howard Waldup's stories will certainly grace Hugo and Nebula ballots for many years to come.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.